=head1 NAME

Catalyst::Manual::Deployment::nginx::FastCGI - Deploying Catalyst with nginx

=head1 nginx

Catalyst runs under nginx via FastCGI in a similar fashion as the lighttpd
standalone server as described above.

nginx does not have its own internal FastCGI process manager, so you must run
the FastCGI service separately.

=head2 Configuration

To configure nginx, you must configure the FastCGI parameters and also the
socket your FastCGI daemon is listening on.  It can be either a TCP socket
or a Unix file socket.

The server configuration block should look roughly like:

    server {
        listen $port;

        location / {
            fastcgi_param  QUERY_STRING       $query_string;
            fastcgi_param  REQUEST_METHOD     $request_method;
            fastcgi_param  CONTENT_TYPE       $content_type;
            fastcgi_param  CONTENT_LENGTH     $content_length;

            fastcgi_param  SCRIPT_NAME        /;
            fastcgi_param  PATH_INFO          $fastcgi_script_name;
            fastcgi_param  REQUEST_URI        $request_uri;
            fastcgi_param  DOCUMENT_URI       $document_uri;
            fastcgi_param  DOCUMENT_ROOT      $document_root;
            fastcgi_param  SERVER_PROTOCOL    $server_protocol;

            fastcgi_param  GATEWAY_INTERFACE  CGI/1.1;
            fastcgi_param  SERVER_SOFTWARE    nginx/$nginx_version;

            fastcgi_param  REMOTE_ADDR        $remote_addr;
            fastcgi_param  REMOTE_PORT        $remote_port;
            fastcgi_param  SERVER_ADDR        $server_addr;
            fastcgi_param  SERVER_PORT        $server_port;
            fastcgi_param  SERVER_NAME        $server_name;
        
            # Adjust the socket for your applications!
            fastcgi_pass   unix:$docroot/myapp.socket;
        }
    }

It is the standard convention of nginx to include the fastcgi_params in a
separate file (usually something like C</etc/nginx/fastcgi_params>) and
simply include that file.

=head2  Non-root configuration

If you properly specify the PATH_INFO and SCRIPT_NAME parameters your
application will be accessible at any path. The SCRIPT_NAME variable is the
prefix of your application, and PATH_INFO would be everything in addition.

As an example, if your application is rooted at /myapp, you would configure:

    fastcgi_param  SCRIPT_NAME /myapp/;
    fastcgi_param  PATH_INFO   $fastcgi_script_name;

C<$fastcgi_script_name> would be "/myapp/path/of/the/action".  Catalyst will
process this accordingly and setup the application base as expected.

This behavior is somewhat different than Apache and Lighttpd, but is still
functional.

For more information on nginx, visit:
L<http://nginx.net>

=head1 AUTHORS

Catalyst Contributors, see Catalyst.pm

=head1 COPYRIGHT

This library is free software. You can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the same terms as Perl itself.

=cut
